We would like to welcome all of you
to a special broadcast
from the world headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
As you may have already heard,
yesterday, April 20,
the Supreme Court
of the Russian Federation
ruled against Jehovah’s Witnesses
and decided to liquidate
the Administrative Center
of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia
and all 395 Local Religious Organizations.
In essence, this means
that the properties
owned by the organization,
such as our Kingdom Halls
and our beautiful branch office,
have been unjustly confiscated
by the Russian government.
The ruling goes into effect immediately.
Our hearts go out to you
dear brothers and sisters in Russia,
but we know that you
deeply appreciate the support given to you
by the worldwide brotherhood.
Just think of how many letters
were sent to Russian officials
by your fellow worshippers
around the world!
Contemplate how many prayers
and supplications
were offered up to Jehovah
and will continue
to be made in your behalf!
Your confidence in Jehovah
warms our heart.
In just a moment,
we will be speaking
with Brother Mark Sanderson,
who was present in the courtroom
when the decision was announced.
However, before speaking with him,
we know you will be very interested
in this account
of the six days of proceedings
that led up
to this very disappointing decision.
The report includes comments
from a delegation of brothers
sent by the Governing Body
to meet with officials
and to be present
for portions of the trial.
The Governing Body
assigned me to come here,
not only for the trial
that’s to take place today,
but also to try
and see if we could do something
to encourage our brothers here
on a small scale.
When we arrived at the airport,
there was a large group of brothers.
Many of them
were of considerable size;
they just kind of shepherded us
through the airport.
We were standing there
with them for a few minutes,
and then one of the brothers
suddenly smiled,
and he said to me in Russian,
“Thank you so much for coming.”
The fundamental question in this case
is whether Jehovah’s Witnesses
are engaged in extremist activity
and whether the Administrative Center
is guilty of having organized
this extremist activity.
When it became known
that the Supreme Court of Russia
was considering a ban
on the worship of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
embassies from around the world requested
information as to what led up to this.
We were successful
in getting high-level meetings
with a number of different officials
at embassies here in Moscow,
and it’s really been quite impressive
to see the reaction
of these people in high station.
It impressed me
that so many of them were eager
to want to do something
within the limited sphere that they have.
And uniformly,
they are just amazed
that Jehovah’s Witnesses,
of all people,
are subject to criticism
or ban on the basis of being extremists.
Now, that comes across to them
as completely absurd
because if there’s one group
of people that’s known
for their neutrality,
it is Jehovah’s people.
Really,
now our eyes are poised toward the trial.
We’re getting ready to go to the court,
and we’ll wait and see
what’s going to happen.
As we were going to the court,
there were about 200
waiting to get into the courtroom,
mostly our brothers,
but then some who
were just interested in the hearing.
We could see the cameramen,
the microphones,
and the many reporters
who were there.
It was clear that this was now
an international event.
Just when we were
in the entranceway,
we stepped in
and here was a couple
that I had met
many years ago in Siberia.
And here they had come
all the way from Siberia
to testify in the hearing,
to be witnesses.
We had four different brothers
representing the Administrative Center.
Each one would take the lead
in arguing one motion.
The judge would listen
to what the brothers had to say,
turn to the Ministry of Justice,
and ask,
“Does the Ministry of Justice
have any input on this?”
The prosecutor would stand,
literally say two or three sentences,
sit down,
and the judge would say:
The brothers raised 20 motions
that they wanted the court to hear.
Of those 20 motions,
the court granted
only two of them to see how
evidence that would exonerate us
was not going
to be allowed in the hearing.
After seeing so many of them be dismissed,
then you began to say,
“Well, they really weren’t going
to take any of them seriously.”
For example,
the brothers were able to show clearly
that the congregations
that had been liquidated
were the result
of the planting of literature,
and that this was on video,
and that the Supreme Court
would refuse
to even see the video.
And that was really a lasting impression
that this was a little bit of a sham,
and it was designed
to go through the formalities,
but you got the sense that the decision
had already been taken.
At the hearing, representatives
from many embassies were there,
and as they listened to the court
hear whether local congregations
would be allowed to defend themselves
and to hear that the court said “no,”
they were not going to be heard,
these embassy representatives were appalled.
And I thought it was
quite interesting that when they saw
how ridiculous some of the rejections
of the motions were at the trial,
there was a murmur of laughter
in the audience,
particularly when the judge
cut off our lawyers
when they were presenting
the evidence of the planted publications.
This to them is evidence that it’s so absurd
that you haven’t got the real evidence
to bring a charge of extremism
so you plant evidence.
Although we were in the Supreme Court,
they don’t have
so many formalities in the court
as perhaps they have in other lands,
and so the brothers were allowed
to stand up and walk around.
To me it had more
the atmosphere of a circuit assembly
than being in a courtroom.
I think it made the charge
that’s been brought upon us
all the more absurd and ridiculous.
You know, just so many came up
and said how grateful they were
to feel the support from the Governing Body,
that they were not facing
this situation alone.
It occurred to me
that it was really a small thing
to travel here,
but for them,
it was symbolic.
They felt that the Governing Body
was there with them.
The decision has not been made.
We’ll have to wait and see.
The government
had only given us a six-day visa,
and so it was impossible
for us to stay any longer.
So our entire delegation,
of course,
with the exception of Brother Kalin,
we all had to leave the next day.
We had in our mind that we were going
to go and strengthen them,
but as is always the case,
I think we were the ones
who came away
even more strengthened
in our own faith.
One ten-year-old wrote this note
to the visiting delegation,
“Thank you for coming to support us
and for your ministry.”
—Sascha, ten years old, Moscow.
As we were leaving
and saying good-bye to these brothers,
there was not a dry eye among us.
They were hugging Brother Sanderson
and telling him,
“This is the spiritual high point
of my life.”
Something occurred in day two
that was unexpected and surprising to us.
Interestingly, the judge became very active,
and he began to really question
the Ministry of Justice.
Why are you bringing this case?
What evidence do you have
that they are engaged
in extremist activities?
The third day of the hearing reminded us
of Matthew 10:18.
“And you will be brought
before governors and kings for my sake.”
But then, what’s the reason?
It says,
“for a witness to them and the nations.”
The international community, worldwide,
has now heard the testimony
of six Jehovah’s Witnesses,
clearly, cogently,
convincingly explaining to the court
that we are law-abiding,
peaceful citizens
—the farthest thing from extremists.
For example, one longtime member
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
Vasiliy Kalin,
explained to the judge
that as a child, he had been forced
into exile with his parents
and was forced
to live in Siberia for years.
Decades later, he was exonerated
and cleared of all charges against him.
In Russia, he’s considered
or referred to as a rehabilitated person,
meaning that the charges
against him have now been expunged.
And now at this point in his life,
they’re saying he’s an extremist.
Anyone could see that the same efforts
that had been made
so long ago to try to hunt down
and wipe out Jehovah’s Witnesses
were just reappearing now
at this particular time.
I was texting with one
of the brothers at the Russia branch
asking how things were going.
He says: “Wow!
“They just announced that the court
“has been suspended
until Wednesday, April 12,
the day after the Memorial.”
And we were all just—
We could hardly believe it
that the court is ending on a Friday
but being postponed until Wednesday.
How wonderful!
We had an adjournment up until April 19.
That gives the brotherhood
in Russia the opportunity
to attend the special talk.
And that special talk is all about peace
—“How to Cultivate Peace in an Angry World.”
So we really hope to be
in the courtroom with our brothers
at the time
when the decision is issued,
even though it
would seem almost impossible
that we could get a visa
to return to Russia.
Basically,
we would have to make
application from Kazakhstan.
If Jehovah wills
and we are able to get the visa,
then Tuesday evening,
I’ll return to Russia
and then on Wednesday morning,
we will be in the court.
Brothers were hugging each other;
at lunchtime everybody was sharing
their sandwiches with each other.
The atmosphere of joy
and love was unforgettable.
The judge began
to go through all of the evidence,
and so there were
43 volumes of evidence
that had been brought forth
in the trial
either by the Ministry of Justice
or by our attorneys.
And so every one of those volumes
had to be reviewed.
And so it was kind of a long process.
Our attorneys were able
to ask the Ministry of Justice,
“Where is the evidence
“that funding from the Administrative Center
was used for any improper activities?”
And so the brothers came back:
“Well, tell me how much money?
how many rubles?
how many kopecks were spent
to fund this improper activity?”
And the ministry:
“Well we don’t have any;
we don’t have any information like that.”
I thought it was quite a surprise
to me that one single judge
could deliberate on six days of evidence
and within an hour come back and ban
a religion from practicing its faith.
When one part of the body suffers,
we all suffer,
and that will be the feeling
throughout the world, I’m sure.
We will allow Jehovah our God
to correct the injustices.
We will continue to be
peaceable with all men.
We will never
‘return evil for evil to anybody.’
We have Brother Mark Sanderson
of the Governing Body tied in with us.
We’re so happy to have you with us, Mark.
And first,
we’d just like to thank you very much
for making the trip to Russia, Moscow,
to be with the brothers
during this critical time.
And we heard so many comments
about how much the brothers appreciated
having you there with them.
Oh, thank you so much, Steve.
You know, to stand unitedly
with our brothers in Russia
in that courtroom when they were facing
such a vicious attack on their worship
from the Devil
was a tremendous privilege.
I have to say, you know,
in all my years in serving Jehovah,
I don’t think I ever felt so proud
to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
as when I was standing in that courtroom.
Very encouraging, Mark.
But tell us, please, a little more
about what was
the reaction of the brothers
when they heard this negative decision?
Well, you know, Steve,
to understand their reaction,
I think we have to just kind of recap
with what’s been happening
because for the last couple of days,
there has been
such a joyful spirit in the courtroom.
The brothers and sisters
have been walking around,
greeting one another,
taking photographs, you know,
hugging one another, there’s just been
this tremendous, joyful feeling
within this courtroom.
And so then,
just before the decision was given,
we heard the closing statements
from our four attorneys
and also from Brother Sergey Cherepanov
and Brother Vasiliy Kalin
who are both
on the Branch Committee in Russia.
And, you know, these brothers
made such powerful statements;
their arguments were so compelling
that we all felt
just very pumped up by what they said.
And then, one of the statements
that several of these brothers made
was that really we’re not really standing
before the Russian Supreme Court
but really the Great Judge
of the universe, Jehovah,
is the one who’s judging all matters.
And they reminded everyone in that courtroom
that everyone is going to have to stand
before the judgment seat of God.
And when we heard that,
we all just felt
so inspired by those comments.
Well, then after a few moments
when the judge
actually issued his decision
and the brothers and sisters
heard that it was negative,
it was just totally silent
in the courtroom.
There was no outcry;
there was no comment.
Some of the brothers shook their head.
I think we were just all in total disbelief
that the judge could issue
such an unjust decision,
after hearing these tremendous arguments
from our brothers.
But I have to say,
although we were stunned
by the unjust decision
there was no hint in that courtroom
that our brothers are backing down,
that they’re cowering,
or that they’re going to give up
their service to Jehovah.
In fact,
you could see that they
were even strengthened by this decision
to go on serving Jehovah faithfully
under their new circumstances.
Those comments, Mark,
are so heartening to us to hear.
But even though
there was a negative decision,
how would you say
that a great shout of praise
has gone up to Jehovah’s name?
You know, Steve,
I just keep coming back
to what Jesus said at Matthew 10:18.
He said that we would
‘be brought before kings and governors,
for a witness to them and to the nations.’
Well, that’s exactly what’s happened here.
We have been brought
before kings and governors.
But what a tremendous witness
has been given to them and to the nations!
For example,
we did this letter-writing campaign.
Our brothers participated
all around the world,
and then the news media
caught on to that,
and many newspapers
and other media outlets reported
on this tremendous effort
to write letters to the officials
of the Russian government.
Then the delegation that was sent
by the Governing Body to Moscow,
we were able to meet
with three different ambassadors
from the largest countries on this earth.
And these ambassadors
who are so difficult to meet with
welcomed us in;
they listened to us patiently;
and they showed that they had
a very deep respect for Jehovah’s Witnesses,
being very familiar with our work
and really wanting to do things
to help Jehovah’s people.
It was wonderful!
And then,
consider all the media coverage
that’s been taking place
on the court case
day after day after day.
And now,
we have a decision.
And so now this court decision
is going to be publicized
by the media
all over the world again.
And still to come,
we have our appeals that are going
to be made in the Russian Supreme Court,
in the European Court of Human Rights,
with the Human Rights Commission.
All of this is going
to result in more publicity.
And in the end,
really, what can we say?
Well, people who know Jehovah’s Witnesses
—people who have
Jehovah’s Witnesses as their neighbors,
as their workmates, as their schoolmates,
who really know who we are—
when they hear these reports,
they are going to immediately recognize
that these charges are ridiculous and absurd.
And they are perhaps even going
to want to ask questions
and perhaps even become interested
in the truth.
So even through this negative decision,
Jehovah’s name is being exalted
and glorified in all the earth.
That is so wonderful, Brother Sanderson,
what you’ve expressed.
And one thing
that we’re just so happy about
is that the brothers were able to celebrate
the Memorial of Christ’s death
before the negative decision was rendered.
I know many of us
—I was praying and others—
were praying that if it be Jehovah’s will
—now of course,
we always want his will to take place—
but if it was his will,
that at least they
could celebrate the Memorial in peace.
And so that happened,
and we’re so happy.
Yes, that was my prayer too.
And, really,
when the decision was made
to adjourn the court
until the day after the Memorial,
you know, we really had
to see Jehovah’s hand in it
because across Russia now that
all of the reports have come in,
we understand that only in three cases
did the police come to a location
where the Memorial was being celebrated.
But even in those cases,
they did not attempt to disturb the occasion.
So we can say that our brothers
were able to celebrate the Memorial
all across Russia in peace.
And, of course,
even with the special talk,
because again the court adjourned,
the special talk was also held
across Russia in peace.
And so in a mighty way,
Jehovah stood by his people
and allowed them to have
these two very important spiritual occasions
before this decision.
We thank Jehovah for that blessing.
We thank you, Mark,
for those very encouraging comments,
and we thank you again
for representing the Governing Body
there in Russia
and supporting the brothers.
We really appreciate it.
And please,
travel home safely.
Thank you so much, Steve.
It was such a wonderful privilege
to be able to be in Russia
with our dear brothers
at this historic moment.
I look forward to seeing you when I return.
And we would like to thank
all of you for your support.
You dear brothers and sisters
gave heartfelt prayers;
you willingly supported
the letter-writing campaign.
For some of you,
sending a letter
to one or more
of the six Russian officials
came at a great expense.
We commend you
for your strong love
for your brothers in Russia
and for your loyalty
to Jehovah’s organization.
But does the Supreme Court’s decision
against us
mean that the letter-writing campaign failed
or that Jehovah did not hear our prayers?
Absolutely not!
It simply means
that we have yet to see
how Jehovah will maneuver events
in harmony with his will.
In the meantime,
we are confident
that our dear brothers and sisters in Russia
will remain steadfast
and that Psalm 112:7, 8
will be true of them.
There it says of Jehovah’s righteous one:
“He will not fear bad news.
“His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.
“His heart is unshakable; he is not afraid;
“in the end
he will look in triumph on his adversaries.”
As long as we’re still living
in this old system,
as we have seen in Russia
and many other lands,
we can expect persecution
for simply wanting
to worship Jehovah in peace.
But do we need to fear such persecution?
No!
Jesus Christ and the heavenly armies
are ready to take the lead
in defending Jehovah’s people.
We can rest assured
that according to Isaiah 54:17:
“No weapon formed against [us]
will have any success.”
And why?
Because Jehovah is on our side.
May we all continue to pray
for our dear brothers and sisters in Russia
whom we love very much.
This is JW Broadcasting
from the world headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.